It might work with a book collector, but Morris is too wide to be.
Connie, you ask me a question.
You see those four white binders?
Those are the slides of the stained glass windows from 185.
This is now a project that you and Helen have taken on.
To do what?
For yourself?
Or is this for scholarship?
I'm wondering if I'm curious.
Somebody ought to get a PhD out of it.
Okay.
Maybe you should get a PhD out of it.
No.
Too much writing.
I could just project pictures.
You're making the connections, aren't you?
And actually, it's a work of preservation, isn't it?
There's an urgency to it, isn't there?
There is, indeed.
And you don't know how many of these are Morris's.
Are these churches that you're shooting?
No, I'm talking Morris and Company.
Okay, for sure.
That's a Morris window, even though the figures are designed right where it goes.
For me, that's Morris.
I don't distinguish, but I'm following what he said.
We do not designate who the individual is designing.
Because if Morris didn't approve of it, it wouldn't have been issued.
I'm just wondering, are you a, I hate, I just hesitate to say, a bibliomaniac, but I guess it's more than biblio.
I mean, would you say that it exceeds what non-collecting people might say as a... It's not particularly rational.
...obsessed behavior, right?
It's reached this somewhat irrational level.
Is it possible that you've ever
paid too much for something, but have you ever regretted it, ever regretted anything?
No, my collection, I've invented a word.
I have a collection of shouldas, things I should have offered and didn't.
Those are the ones that I remember vividly.
Like, for instance?
Okay.
See, Morris faced much of his early floral design work
on Gerard's Herbal, I think 1630 or 32.
And I was offered not Morris's copy, but a copy of the same edition, when I'm not sure exactly the date, but it was still pretty much when I was focusing on the Count Scott Press.
$300 in 1968 was notable, and I didn't.
And now that I'm this deep into the decorative arts, it would have been a major piece.
Well, I'm grateful to Dover Publishing.
They did a facsimile in small, didn't they?
But it kicks you off that you don't have anything.
That I don't have.
And now when I see it in the catalog once in a while,
It's up in the $4,000, and I don't care to pay that much.
So there are limits.
Oh, yeah, depending on the importance and where it fits in.
Like an important piece.
See, I got, here's this sub, sub collection.
And Byrne-Jones intended to do an illustrated version of the Cupid and Psyche story from Apuleius.
And Morris, Byrne-Jones did designs, and they were cut in the wood blocks.
Morris did mostly engraving himself, which is from now.
And they went to the best printer in London at the time.
and tried the text, and it was so limp compared to the guts of the woodblocks, they said, no way, and they abandoned it.
Only after Morris had designed the Troy type did they actually set up some, I think, five pages at the Kelmscott Press using
So after they had the Troy type, then you had, let's say, they would both sit on the page happily together.
Now, from those five pages that were set up at the Kelmscott Press, this rampant Lyons press in London got permission from the Cambridge University Press that has all the molds for Morris's Troy type.
They cast enough type to print this, and they extrapolated from those five pages
the whole book that Morris and Byrne Jones intended.
That's nice, isn't it?
Yeah.
This is fabulous.
And when was this done?
This is on the... So it's fairly recent.
Oh, yeah.
Seventy-four.
That's gorgeous.
Now, before this got published, I had gotten a hold of, just like that,
set of proofs, probably a unique set of proofs of the woodblocks.
That's in this book.
That's from Cupid and Psyche, PSYC.
And that triggered my interest in the story.
And before this came out, I started accumulating all the illustrated editions of Cupid and Psyche.
You were well ahead on.
I had all kinds of illustrated.
couple of super things presented themselves, like a book of Byrne Jones drawings for those illustrations.
The original.
And then you want the real trigger is this little thing, which
From the library of William Mars.
This was printed 1567.
And the thing I love is that this just might have stimulated the idea of doing an illustrated version of Cupid and Psyche.
Because here, if you hold that.
This is a book from his library.
in latin telling the story of cupid and psyche is that right right let's see if i can find this let's go okay let's for this is a book i'm holding that's 400 odd years old i should point out 1467 no 1567 yeah
Look at the position of where was the oil lamp.
Oh, absolutely.
Look at that.
Now, is that coincidence?
And it's the same story, too.
Oh, yeah.
Byrne Jones and Morris went home.
That's out of Morris' library.
It's the same story, and there's the illustrations.
Isn't that what it is?
Yeah, it's more than coincidental, isn't it?
So those last two things came after I was deeply into it, so that really put the icing on it.
looking for them.
Well, they just happened to come along and it fits in like I call it coincidence that it was meant to be.
The thing is, you are an artistic person yourself.
So many collectors collect, they say they collect because they feel that
Well, they are not creative, but this allows them to get close to the creative process.
Yeah.
Where you are artistic, where you have... Oh, that's wonderful.
You're going to give us this?
Yeah.
Would you sign it for us?
Oh.
People frame them in there, I think.
No, those are commercial things.
My firm sent them out to clients.
They're beautiful.
You know, like...
Reminders.
Still here?
The villa where Helen was standing on the balcony with the tiara.
That's gorgeous.
I guess this question would really be my last one.
If there's anything else I need, I'll call you.
I guess I was
kind of probing the getting close to the creative process thing.
Those are favorite places.
See, now this is the American church in Rome.
The interior was done by Morris and Company.
This is Byrne Jones' mosaic.
It's beautiful stuff.
Describe the collection.
Oh, you warned somebody.
Well, I heard it described as the most extraordinary collection you'll see on everything to do with William Morris.
It really doesn't, it's really not weak in any area, is it?
No.
I think that's something we should point out.
Realize that whole cabinet over there is all socialist.
Which we haven't even talked about yet.
And for people who specialize in that, they say this is as good as they think.
And these penny
pamphlets were so fragile that to have them all here is it a legacy for you do you think had you had you thought when you started collecting that you would be creating i didn't even remember the preface well i no i didn't know the collection i know that but i'm saying now i'm saying oh now yeah i mean i know i'm not saying that when you ever start i'm saying now i mean when we look at the
The collection in its totality.
What I'm saying is, it is.
We're looking at the Sanford and Hellenberger collection.
That blows my mind.
Oh, I'll tell you what really blew my mind.
When UC had the exhibit at the Art Museum,
For each exhibit on the outside of the building, way up high in big letters, they put the name of the exhibit.
And there was our name, you know, like you see your name on the mark.
That was something.
That was a tingling.
Yeah, I was about to.
Today is the ninth of August.
Yeah, see, it stands up as a high chair, it rolls around, or it lowers down to be a rocker.
This is August.
Yeah, I thought his birthday was Monday, right?
Oh, dear, and you're not there.
No, we will be there.
Oh, you will?
Oh, that's great.
I am impressed.
He told me to say this.
Well, does it look like I want to miss something for you?
Yes.
No, I like what you're asking about.
Thank you.
Those are very important.
whatever they call them.
Well, I'm celebrating the collector, but the, I mean, there was a purpose to end with that question, because that is, that is the legacy, and the legacy goes on, and people will continue to draw from it, and you've made a collection out of things that were everywhere.
Yeah.
I mean, it's the Berger collection now.
You know, and then you can take that away from it.
Okay, you said something earlier.
that I think what you were saying, even though a lot of individual items are not terribly valuable in themselves, their place in the collection gives them a value rate.
And by the same token, when you say shouldas, ones that you shoulda got, the addition or elimination of one item doesn't make or break a collection.
True.
The collection makes the collection.
I asked this question to Michael Kors.
why i'm happy to have facsimiles of things i choose not to afford to buy because for the scholar it's important you be able to read the text or see the facsimile design of this so you have chosen to keep the passion in check i should say i interviewed one man who said who's a very wealthy man today
He said, up until two years ago, a day never went by that I wasn't in debt to one bookseller or another.
I mean, this guy has six, three houses, three houses filled with books and pamphlets.
And he's a wonderful collector.
And he gets the item first, and it doesn't matter what.
See, I never could let myself do that.
As soon as a book arrives, I write the check.
I've never been behind.
But the point is, you know from the beginning, from the get-go, as we say, that you can afford it, that it's not something that you can't afford.
Correct.
Yeah.
I don't let myself order it if I can't pay for it then.
There's nothing that you have to have, whatever the cost.
It was tempting.
Really, what was?
I see, I could have... Yeah, let me zero.
That would be great, thank you.
I forgot to emphasize and didn't mention, but I think it's very important is, as an architect and appreciating the design process, that it is why I particularly wanted to assemble
all the sequence, document all the sequence of events that have to take place from the first concept stage to the preliminary development stage to before you reach the final stage where it's just right.
Because it's so easy to look at a final product.
And it's easy to say, yeah, that's nice, and just walk away from it.
So when you've tried to do it yourself, then it becomes a marvel when you look at that final thing that's just right.
And being able to see all the pieces that go into these things.
That's a major problem.
The design process, beginning to end, sort of prior.
Well, you think he's fully right on the boat if he didn't?
No, we gave up the boat when the kids offered.
We have the boat.
We can put the next page on the back.
And one question.
Do the kids share the enthusiasm for the collection?
Yeah, but when it comes to thinking, I was thinking earlier when you were talking about the Shidee collection, the third generation, and whether
His kids are going to be the fourth generation.
I was thinking about my own, and I'd love it if they did carry it on.
But right now, they're each in the stage of frantically trying to pay off the mortgages and take vacations and just looking forward to having kids.
And they can't begin to think about this.
So maybe if I can survive long enough,
By that time, they might have reached a stage where they could consider continuing.
That could possibly change your mind, then, about what happens to the collective.
Yeah, I think that's a fair state.
But I frankly don't think they can reach that before I run out of time.
You can turn that off.
That's another fantastic story.
These are rubbings of brass monuments from the floor of the Church of St.
Giles.
G-I-L-E-S.
At Great Coxwell.
C-O-X-W-E-L-L.
And it says under the male figure, Here lieth Willem Morris, W-I-L-L-M,
M-O-R-Y-S, sometime farmer of Coxwell.
And under the female figure it says, Here lieth Johane, the wife of Will and Morris.
And Morris' wife's name was Jane.
And these were from 1510.
Can you believe it?
This is a village very near the village of Kelmscott where Morris had his manor.
So he took this flower that's between the feet of the male figure and used it for the watermark for the first Kelmscott Press paper, and he used a leaf design as a paragraph mark for the Kelmscott Press.
I mean, imagine finding the name of you and your wife with the same names from 400 years earlier.
That's really something.
But he took it and made the watermark.
Yeah.
And that leaf he used, too, right?
Right.
That's a great story.
We can't go home, Sandy says.
We want to see something incredible.
And what have we been looking at?
These are Apprentice Tapestry Weaver's trial pieces.
From his?
From Morris Company.
Look at that.
Each one is tied separately.
They sit on the back side and look through the warp, the woof, whichever that is, and look at a mirror to see what thing is developing.
But what I was saying about Morris, he left the selection of detailed design of this and selection of the coloring
up to the individual craft.
Did this come with the archives?
Yes.
If it were to you that way.
Yeah.
See, and this was their miniature loom that they would practice on.
This tells about that.
They made everything, didn't they?
Oh, yeah.
To decorate that.
Look at this damask.
Gorgeous.
Look at the swatches.
This mock-up of the carpet.
And they would show these to people?
Sure.
Get approval.
Who basically were they?
Who were their clients?
Rich.
That's Morris designed for a machine-made carpet.
So he tried to accommodate to the less rich.
That's why he developed the wallpaper.
But the way they did wallpaper, it was so labor intensive
Wouldn't we love Morris Wallpaper today?
You can get it.
But it's expensive.
Around every corner is a surprise and a treasure.
Oh, right here.
That was done by his father.
And it was meant for William Randolph Hearst.
Yeah, Morris did a lot of wood carving and stuff as well.
So Morris could have carved this.
But they changed the design so that they... Yeah, this piece was abandoned and he carved another one from the camera.
It had to be longer than whatever.